---
layout: post
tags: [hardware, power-supply]
title: "Making a power supply fan temperature-sensing"
---

The Ender 5 contains a Landy LRS-350-24. This PSU is clearly a poorly-made and
unlisted clone of the MEAN WELL LRS-350-24.

It is a flyback power converter, using [SMF18N50][]s as the mains-side switches,
and [MBR20200][] diodes as the output-side switches. The output-side diodes are
marked DS1 and DS2.

[SMF18N50]: http://www.semihk.com/Data/semihk/upload/file/20180926/TO-220F%20SMF18N50.pdf
[MBR20200]: http://www.smc-diodes.com/propdf/MBR20200%20N1091%20REV.A.pdf

For the MBR20200, the relevant characteristics are:

|Characteristic|Typ|
|--------------|---|
|Vf, forward voltage drop|0.9V|
|Tj, operating junction temperature|150°C|

For the SMF18N50, the relevant characteristics are:

|Characteristic|Typ|
|--------------|---|
|Rds(on), on resistance|0.25Ω|
|Tj, operating junction temperature|150°C|

Assuming 80% efficiency, the power dissipated over the mains-side MOSFETs is
`(80%×350W/110V)^2 × 0.25Ω = 1.6W`.

Assuming 80% efficiency, the power dissipated over the output-side diodes is
`(80%×350W/24V) × 0.9V = 10.5W`.

Therefore, we ought to put our temperature sensor on the output side. This is
nice, because otherwise we would have needed to be very careful not the ruin our
mains isolation.

We now need to control the fan speed such that it only reaches max speed when
the parts get hot.

I found a BS170 in one of my parts bags, so putting that together like this:

{% include image.html
    url="/assets/images/2017-04-06-landy-psu/circuit.svg"
    description="The simulated circuit at under load" %}

I simulated this circuit with [falstad.com/...][circuit], and it works,
although the MOSFET does get toasty when the temperature is about 53°C.

This isn't ideal, but:

- the 600mW dissipated at that point is less than the max 830mW for this part
- Vth actually decreases as the temperature increases
- we have a cooling fan reducing the thermal resistance
- hopefully we get lucky and our steady state temperature is either higher or
  lower than 53°C

[circuit]: https://www.falstad.com/circuit/circuitjs.html?ctz=CQAgjCAMB0l3BWcMBsBmALAJhQdgWgJwAcYKCFICkVVNCApgLRhgBQA7iFsceDyAxx+fSGwBOg4WAFCaWLBijchnKfIQp13XlDYAzHX0U05KmvOgQYYSAgzEEWNFkh4Et+2wBKRkef8LKRVlC2gENgBzbR4+MzRIJQs2NGo-GWNdE2VbeBo0FDsaJiFwNJgHSFc8mrhcEAAVBgBbAAcGcQBDABcAV3EGCT9s2L9TXDg1UdGzUbEgA


{% include image.html
    url="/assets/images/2017-04-06-landy-psu/pcb.jpg"
    description="The circuit built is built onto a PCB" %}

Securing the thermistor is tricky. The solution I arrived upon is to wrap the
cable around the center screw on the output diodes, and bury the glass bead in
the thermal paste in the diode screw hole. I then placed a folded piece of heat
shrink to help secure the bead into the hole.

I'm comfortable with this because these diode packages are insulated. The metal
tab is coated with plastic.

{% include image.html
    url="/assets/images/2017-04-06-landy-psu/thermistor.jpg"
    description="Installation of the thermistor onto the output diodes" %}

Everything is then wrapped up in insulating tape and taped out of the way.
Unfortunately, there's no good place to put the thermistor wire. A coil of wire
in a SMPS is not a good idea. I'll be redoing this at some point, with a PWM
solution, and I'll cut the wire shorter then.


{% include image.html
    url="/assets/images/2017-04-06-landy-psu/packing.jpg"
    description="Everything packaged together!" %}
