---
layout: post
tags: [ hardware, embedded, esp32 ]
title: "Connecting to ROCKSEED RS310P programmable power supply over WiFi"
---

Other articles in this series:

- [Reversing the ROCKSEED RS310P programmable power supply](/2023/rs310p-reversing)

This device is a rebadge of the ETommens eTM-xxxxP series of programmable power supplies,
and [this power supply specifically looks the closest][et-ref]. This teardown should be fairly
applicable to the: Hanmatek HM305P, Rockseed RS305P, Hanmatek HM310P, RockSeed RS310P, Rockseed
RS605P, eTommens eTM305P, eTommens eTM3010P, eTommens eTM1003P, eTommens eTM1520P, eTommens eTM605P,
and eTommens eTM1502P.

[et-ref]: https://www.etommensltd.com/product/45

---

I've previously mentioned that it ought to be fairly easy to connect this power supply's serial
interface to WiFi. I didn't originally plan to document my process, so pictures are a bit sparse.

I did ths so that I could control the power supply from my computer, using the
[`rs310p_dc_psu`][rs310p_dc_psu] software.

{% include image.html
url="/assets/images/2023-08-20-rs310p-wifi-mod/installed-mod.jpg"
description="The fully installed mod" %}

## Hardware

### ESP8266 via D1 Mini CH340

You need an ESP8266 board with a voltage regulator to convert the power supply's 5V to 3.3V. I used
a D1 Mini CH340, which worked fine, although I needed to desolder and remove a pull-up resistor on
the ESP8266's RX pin.

{% include image.html
url="/assets/images/2023-08-20-rs310p-wifi-mod/d1-mini.jpg"
description="The ESP8266 D1 Mini CH340 module" %}

ESP-Link only supports the ESP8266, so the ESP32 is not suitable here.

A level shifter is not required because 3.3V on the ESP8266's TX pin is considered logic high by the
5V MCU on the power supply, and [the ESP8266's RX pin is 5V tolerant][esp8266-5v-tolerant].

[esp8266-5v-tolerant]: https://www.qworqs.com/2021/05/19/are-the-esp32-and-esp8266-5v-tolerant-yes-they-officially-are/

### JST B4B-XH-A

I had a clone JST XH 4-pin connector in my parts bin, so I used that. This is convenient because the
power supply can be swapped back to the original USB adapter with no additional work.

### Miscellaneous

I also used large clear heatshrink, some hot glue, some jumper wires, and a soldering iron.

## Installation

I first installed ESPLink on the ESP8266. I used [the 3.2.47.alpha binary][esp-link-3.2.47-alpha].
The ESP8266 was connected to my computer via USB, and I ran the following
command: `esptool.py -b 1000000 -p /dev/ttyUSB1 write_flash --flash_freq 20m --flash_mode dio --flash_size 4MB 0x1000 user1.bin 0x0000 boot_v1.7.bin 0x3fc000 esp_init_data_default.bin 0x3fe000 blank.bin`

The ESP8266 was then left connected to my computer while I added it to my WiFi network. I set the
baud rate in the "µC Console" tab to 9600 8N1, and made a note of the IP address.

[esp-link-3.2.47-alpha]: https://github.com/jeelabs/esp-link/releases/tag/v3.2.47.alpha

I then soldered the connector to the ESP8266 module, using the pinout on the stock USB adapter as
a reference. As is often the case, RX goes to ESP8266 TX and vice versa.

{% include image.html
url="/assets/images/2023-07-22-rs310p-reversing/uart-pins.jpg"
description="Pinout for the UART cable" %}

The system was fully assembled and tested before I put everything back together with hot glue, heat
shrink and cable ties.

{% include image.html
url="/assets/images/2023-08-20-rs310p-wifi-mod/installed-mod.jpg"
description="The fully installed mod" %}

## Usage

Download the [latest version of `rs310p_dc_psu`][rs310p_dc_psu]. I created
a virtualenv with `virtualenv venv`, entered it with `source venv/bin/activate`, and installed the
dependencies with `pip install pymodbus==2.5.3 p3lib==1.1.10 bokeh==2.3.2`.

[rs310p_dc_psu]: https://github.com/pjaos/rs310p_dc_psu

I then started the GUI using `./psu.py -g -p <my-esplink-ip>:23`, replacing `<my-esplink-ip>` with
the actual IP. Once the GUI was running, I clicked the "On" button, and the power supply turned on.

{% include image.html
url="/assets/images/2023-08-20-rs310p-wifi-mod/screenshot.png"
description="The GUI with the power supply connected" %}

There's lots of additional functionality in `rs310p_dc_psu`, see that project's README for more
information.
